professor lucy yardley i'm so sorry to
interrupt i do apologize but
we can see you perhaps can't but the
prime minister's just arrived for the
briefing
you all last week i explained that the
number of
covid patients going into hospital had
doubled in a fortnight
and i explained that the rate of
infections was climbing steeply
i said that we face the sad reality that
on these figures
we could expect many more daily deaths
and so that's why we announced the
package of restrictions
and stronger enforcement last week
at the same time we've been intensifying
the local
lockdowns in areas where the disease has
been flaring up
and i want to say i know how tough it is
and has been for
these communities and i want to pay a
particular tribute
to the students who are experiencing a
first term
back at university uh unlike anything
they they could have imagined i can
assure you
and assure everybody at universities
that plans are being put in place to
allow
students home safely for christmas
and i wish i could tell you tonight that
the impact of this package
has already begun to appear but it will
take time
to feed through and yesterday we saw the
biggest
rise in daily cases since the pandemic
began
today a further 7108
we've also had a tragic increase in the
number of daily deaths with 71 yesterday
and again today and these figures show
why our plan is so essential
we have to stick to it together and we
should stick to it with confidence
because there are many ways in which
we're far better prepared
than we were in march we're on track to
hit our target
of being able to conduct 500 000 tests a
day
by the end of october we're already
exceeding
the number of tests per capita that are
conducted in in germany france and spain
we have over 2 000 beds
that could be available across 19 gal
seven
seven nightingale hospitals and we will
be able to go
further if needed we've ordered 32
billion items
of ppe and we'll have a four month
stockpile
of masks visors gowns and other
essentials
for winter by december by the way we
expect
uk manufacturers will meet 70 percent
of the demand for ppe compared with just
one percent before the pandemic
and in the last six months we've more
than troubled the availability
of mechanical ventilators to our nhs
across the uk to 31
hundred but the best way forwards
uh to protect the nhs save lives
to keep our children in school and the
economy moving
is to follow the rules wherever we live
so i wanna thank everyone for the
fantastic
national effort that we are seeing and
continuing to see
and no matter how impatient we may be
how fed up
we may become there is only one way
of doing this and that's by showing a
collective forbearance
common sense and willingness to make
sacrifices for the safety
of others at this critical moment when i
know
uh people will be wanting to know the
details i will be providing
regular updates through these press
conferences
and i have to be clear that if the
evidence requires it
we will not hesitate to take further
measures
that would i'm afraid be more costly
than the ones we put into effect now but
if we put in the work together now
then we give ourselves the best possible
chance
of avoiding that outcome and avoiding
further measures i know that some people
will think
we should give up and let the virus take
its course
despite the huge loss of life that that
would potentially entail i have to say
i profoundly disagree and i don't think
it's what the
british people want i don't think they
want to throw in the sponge they want to
fight
and defeat this virus and that is what
we're going to do even as we fight
covet it's vital that people get all the
treatment they need
for other conditions but it must be
clear
if the nhs were to be overwhelmed by
covid
then no one could get any such
care and that's why we must bear down
on this virus now so that we never reach
that point and i'm absolutely confident
that with ever increased testing with
better treatments
and of course with the prospect of a
vaccine
we will get through this so
let's follow the rules wash our hands
cover our faces
observe social distancing download the
app as 14 million of you
have already done and together we will
fight back against this virus
protect our nhs and save many
more lives i'm now going to hand over to
chris whitney
thank you prime minister uh first slide
please
i thought it was sensible to start off
looking back over
what happened in the first wave of this
pandemic in the uk
and these are the office for national
statistics data the ons data
showing all-cause mortality which is the
most important thing to look at
it is because it includes both the
direct deaths from covid
uh in the red line but also the indirect
deaths
which are the excess deaths over the
yearly average
from all causes because as we know
and it's been discussed many times in
these meetings
you can have people who die because the
health service is overwhelmed
or because the health service is less
able to operate
effectively or in the long run
because of the economic impacts of the
interventions we have so all cause
mortality is critical
and if you look at this across uh the
various areas of england and the same is
true in fact if you look in the other
three nations
of the united kingdom what you see is a
wave that happened
over the period from late march through
to july
in all cause and covert associated
mortality and these
data are broken down by region
next slide please the pattern we are
seeing in
the current upswing in covid cases
is at this point in time and this may
change rather different
there is on the left what we have is the
total
rate in terms of the amount of covid
uh that is being detected on a weekly
basis uh
where darker colors are the more severe
the
light the higher rates and as you can
see at this point in time
there is a very heavy concentration in
particular areas
in particular in the northwest the
northeast and parts of the midlands
but on the right what you can see is
also
the increase in kovid activity
that is happening over the last seven
days
any color in orange is means it is
increasing and the darker the color
the more rapid the increase so what you
can see in this
is that there's a general increase
across the whole of
england and the same is also true in
scotland wales and northern ireland
with a few exceptions but a very
rapid increase in particular areas again
particularly in the northeast north west
and areas of the midlands not
exclusively there
next slide please
and this breaks this down into the
regions of england
but also looking at different age groups
and what you can see in each of these
areas is the
multiple age bands from the dark blue
which are the youngest children
up to the black which is those aged 80
or over
and in most regions of england
you're seeing a relatively flat though
gradually rising picture
in terms of number of coveted cases over
time
but if you look at the northeast and
north west and yorkshire and humber and
to a lesser extent the west midlands
you can see a significant rise now
particularly in younger people but
increasingly also
in people who are older and have a
greater risk of having a bad outcome
remembering of course that young people
can also have bad outcomes in terms of
prolonged
symptoms uh even if they do not have a a
fatal case or one that gets some intense
intensive care so
this increase as you can see is
accelerating
quite rapidly in some of those areas
next slide please
some people are worried that this might
be based just on testing capacity so
this
is a different way of looking at the
same thing in the same
areas looking at test positivity rate
and in parts in particular of the
northeast and the northwest
we've moved from a situation uh where uh
by
age group we the average uh might have
less than five
percent of tests being positive up to a
situation where for some age groups
over 15 percent of tests are now
positive this implies
there is a very significant increase uh
in terms of transmission in these areas
again
quite variable across the country next
slide please
it's important to differentiate between
different age bands between between
young younger people children and young
adults
and this is just to make the point in
the dark blue
and light blue colors we have
children 5 to 10 and 11 to 14
and in green we have children aged 15 to
16 and in these
groups currently the rates are actually
really not changing very much
these are school-age children in the
main
whereas in older young children and
young adults
in those 17 uh up to 20 21
and the same is true for other young
adults
uh the rates are now going quite rapidly
i've chosen to illustrate it with slide
positivity
i could have done this with other routes
so this is important to remember when
people
worry about schooling schools are one of
the areas school-aged children's is one
of the areas where the rates are not
going up
and this is true across the country next
slide please
uh there is um i think some uh
some people are wondering whether we
could actually have a situation where
the rates
of uh infections are going up but we're
not seeing increases in hospitalization
so what this has on this slide uh is the
admission rates
um on the right to hospital uh and the
intensive care rates on the left
by age and i think an important thing to
see on this
is that the uh dark blue uh dark dark
line at the top
um and the green line which is the one
below that
in terms of people being hospitalized
are those 85 and
over and 75 to 84. so older people are
getting this
and they are then having to go into
hospital and then
transferring uh some of them sadly into
intensive care
next slide please and if we look at the
hospitalizations
across the country they follow very much
the pattern you would expect
from the rates of infection so in the
northwest
and the northeast and yorkshire the nhs
data
show that the rates of hospitalization
are now climbing steadily
they are at a much lower level than they
were at the beginning of april want to
stress that really clearly
but they are definitely heading upward
at a now
relatively steady and rapid pace
in other areas this is rather slower and
london
and the midlands are between these areas
next slide please the final slide
is just to look again at the intensive
care rates
and people who enter intensive care are
at
significantly increased risk of dying
and this is again just showing
uh in the northeast uh
in and in the northwest in particular
but also uh in london uh to some extent
uh we're seeing a significant uptick
in the number of people who are entering
intensive care this is not yet at a
stage
where it is threatening our ability to
uh have
intensive care cases are still
significant capacity
in the nhs system but this is definitely
heading
the wrong way the final point i'd like
to make
before we go on to just an animation
looking at the spread
over time is about those who do not have
covid
and it is something which my colleagues
in the medical profession have asked me
to stress
really strongly to people uh this
evening and that is that the nhs is
absolutely
open for business and it is absolutely
there not just for emergencies for
cancer care and for all other kinds of
care
so what we are not saying is please
don't go to hospital please don't go to
your gp absolutely not
we definitely are very very keen as a
profession as well as within government
that that continues but we are just
pointing out
that the direction of travel for both
hospitals and intensive care
is clearly going in the wrong direction
particularly in these areas which have
seen
rapid increases in cases we now have an
animation
so this shows a map over time
starting in march lighter colors are
small amounts of covert this is how it
spread
in the first wave and on the right you
can see the wave
getting steadily darker concentrating at
that stage in particular around london
but also other areas of the midlands
north
uh and uh elsewhere um and then due to
the remarkable efforts of the entire
nation
everybody coming together we got on top
of that wave
people kept social distancing they kept
all the rules about
han's face and space and we had
significant uh things that led to people
and not coming together in households
and
the uh the amount of covid uh went down
over time but then it started to come
back again uh
concentrating initially in a small
number of places but then has
steadily spread initially in these
areas in the north and midlands
primarily not exclusively
but now potentially spreading elsewhere
if we do not
all take all the various issues about
social distancing
and hand space in space very seriously
thank you very much
thanks very much chris and i think that
point about the nhs and
uh the capacity of the nhs and the the
openness of the nhs to people to
uh to to go and have their uh
and have their issues dealt with is very
very important
but obviously that becomes much less
possible
uh if we get uh an increased spike in
the disease across the country let's go
to
uh questions from the public first uh
to tear from oldham that the appropriate
support is available
across the uk for young people to be
able to fulfill their potential
moving through these times of
uncertainty as lockdown and covert 19
have affected young people's mental
health education
and youth unemployment has risen well
thank you uh very much tear i think the
the answer to that is obviously that we
will do everything we can to
uh to help young people through this uh
difficult time
and you'll have seen the package that we
put in place to support
uh people going back to universities
working with the vice chancellors to get
coveted secure
universities and again i i thank uh
students for
the responsible way that they are uh
they are behaving
uh in in terms of employment uh
for uh for young people tia
the answer is that we really want to
help young people get into
jobs where wherever we possibly can
that's why we've launched the kickstart
plan two billion pound kickstart plan to
to give people
uh support in jobs give employers
support uh from the government up to the
value of the living wage
uh to uh support young people into work
and
and i'd also mention uh what we're doing
uh in terms of
of training uh the the lifetime skills
guarantee that we
announced yesterday to give young people
people in their in their 20s the ability
to retrain get the jobs uh that are out
there
and we will do everything we can as i've
said repeatedly to put our arms around
the workforce help young people through
this through this pandemic and
and bounce back as as strongly as we can
the other side
thanks very much tia let's go to to carl
from milton keynes
carl oh forgive me carl i'm going to
read your question
uh with areas in the country now under
more stringent local lockdown rules
how the enforcement agency is going to
stop those people in these areas
traveling to other parts of the country
that have fewer
restrictions well uh clearly there are
there are local areas carl uh that are
under uh particular restrictions and uh
what you should
what you should do is uh look at the
website if you're in one of those local
lockdown areas and
see what what restrictions you need to
place what
guidance you specifically need to obey
but what we're not doing at the moment
carl is
going back to the situation we were in
uh in march and i
really don't want to to do this i don't
want to go back to a national lockdown
where
uh you know the overall guidance is stay
at home that is not what we're saying we
want
to keep the economy moving we want to
keep
young people pupils in education
but the only way we can do that is if we
all follow the guidance
and and depress the virus get the virus
down
by following that guidance and and keep
things moving
as much as we as much as we possibly can
um
carl thank you let's go to uh laura
kunsberg of the bbc
laura thank you prime minister um we can
see today that the limits are already in
place on millions of people have not
stopped the spread and you even had to
apologize for failing to explain the
rules properly
how can people have confidence in your
government's approach
and can you give people your honest
assessment how high
is the chance of more restrictions
coming in for everyone
everywhere and if i could ask professor
whitsey and sir patrick you spelt out a
possible
terrible trajectory last week with as
many as 50 000 cases a day now the way
you did that
caused some controversy with seven days
of extra data
what do you say now about how bad this
might get
well laura the the answer is i'm afraid
entirely dependent on how effective we
are now
collectively in driving down the virus
and we know we can do it
because we did it before and we did it
in march
and april and by uh collectively working
to stop the
transmission of the the virus from one
person to the next from household
to household as we did uh in march and
april we greatly reduced the number of
uh of deaths we massively reduced uh
transmission what we have now
is a is a package of measures that we
we brought forward last week and it's a
combination of national measures
uh the uh increased enforcement of the
of the rule of six the restrictions on
hours of of hospitality
uh the the measures of the intensified
measures on on wearing face masks plus
the basic hands face space national
measures
and then with tougher enforcement and
then
local lockdown measures as well
and what we hope is that if people
obey the guidance fulfill the guidance
in the way that they can and within the
way
they have in the past then we'll get uh
the spread
down again that's that's the uh
that's what we're we're working towards
and the strategy is
uh to do that whilst keeping the economy
open
the vast bulk of the economy open and
keeping uh young people
in education those have got to be
absolutely crucial priorities
uh for our society so i'm
you know confident that we can do it
together
if we follow the guidance but our
success
will have to be judged i'm afraid in the
days and weeks ahead as we look at the
numbers
that come in as i said in my in my
statement earlier on it is
it is still too early to tell whether
that budget that package of measures
is being successful and its success
depends on all of us working together
to follow the guidance um chris and
patrick sorry
thanks laura um there were three
messages really that we were trying to
get across
in terms of the data the first was
if you look at other countries you see
that cases go up
followed by spread to older people
followed by hospitalizations
and unfortunately leading to icu and to
deaths
that looks like what's happening here
the second
message was that cases were already
increasing
at the time that we gave that
presentation and you could already begin
to see increases in hospitalizations
which as chris has shown have increased
further since
the illustration was to point out that
epidemics either double or half you know
they're either growing or shrinking
and doubling means that things go very
big quite quickly
so things move quickly and when things
double
you see that exponential growth which
means you end up with very high numbers
and it means you've got to act
quickly in order to deal with that and
as chris has laid out today
we're seeing quite fast growth in some
areas of the country it's not uniform
right the way across the country
but there's clearly fast growth in some
areas
and those numbers are going up and
unfortunately as we've seen
not only cases going up but we're
already seeing an increase in deaths so
things are definitely headed in the
wrong direction i do want to just make
one comment though which is quite
important to understand when looking at
the numbers of cases
the number of cases that we're seeing
now are picked up because there's much
more testing
the number of cases that are reported in
march were almost certainly a very big
underestimate of the total so it's much
more likely that back in march and april
at the peak of this we were seeing over
a hundred thousand cases a day
at certain times whereas of course
you're only able to measure and report a
fraction of that so it's not a direct
like-for-like comparison
thanks very much uh laura can we go to
robert peston
of itv thank you hello um if you go back
to the beginning of
august and you track infections in
england and scotland they have risen
massively faster in scotland and again
within england
there is a much bigger problem in the
northeast and the north west in terms of
rapid rise and incidents of the virus
can you explain why there is this very
big difference between
the northern part of the country and the
rest of the country and then
secondly um 71
deaths on march the 21st there were 71
deaths
today and yesterday there have been 71
deaths back in march we were two days
away from full lockdown you don't think
things are as bad or as urgent in terms
of
more remedial measures as you did then
what is the difference
um well i i'm going to ask uh chris and
patrick to comment uh both on the
the the epidemiology the the lo the
localization of the
uh of the disease and uh the difference
in the rate of spread of the disease
between
uh now and uh and march the
the 21st but you know clearly one point
i would make as a
somebody trying to to get this disease
down across the whole country is i do
think that it is possible
that there is a difference robert now in
the in the way the disease is
is expressing itself in in their country
we are seeing some very clear local
uh peaks uh just as i think uh christmas
has made this point uh to me and and
publicly
just as as there were local peaks in in
italy
uh and other countries and it may be and
this is it's too early to say
uh but it may be that uh again this is a
more localized uh phenomenon this time
in which case all the more reason
uh for us to concentrate on these uh
local solutions as well as the
as the national solutions but uh i think
on the on the point about the the rate
of climb of the
of the disease between now and marching
it's a very interesting point we should
have a first go patrick will probably
want to add to this i mean if you look
around
uh europe um during the first wave that
happened here
uh the uk was actually the an outlier in
having an
epidemic that was almost uniform in
shape although not absolutely in size
across the whole country
and if you look at italy in spain for
example significant epidemics but very
very highly concentrated
now it is possible that in this next
stage of the epidemic here we will have
a pattern more like that which is more
highly concentrated in certain areas
lower rates than the others but it is
far too early to say that we've got a
long winter ahead of us and a lot could
happen
over that time so i think to predict
ford from here
would be a big mistake but it is
certainly possible that
if we all work together if everybody uh
follows the guidance
uh then we could actually uh contain it
within the areas where it is in the way
that happened
to some degree as i say in italy and
spain
uh in terms of where we are um compared
to where we were in march you're
absolutely right in terms of your
numbers and
uh um patrick and i have had the
privilege of being attacked both for
being too pessimistic and too optimistic
on the numbers
the reality is that the doubling time at
the moment uh
is slower than it was in uh march when
it was three to four days and
uh that that was a one big difference
and in fact one of the problems we had
in the first wave
was i think we initially underestimated
how fast the doubling
uh was occurring at that stage and it's
very important we don't do that a second
time because once exponential growth
starts as patrick has said
things go very quickly also we are going
up from a base the sort of the tail of
the first wave
in terms of deaths is still occurring
and then these new ones are on top so
it's not a straight
light for light comparison but you are
you are completely right that this small
number of deaths now
shouldn't reassure us that we won't be
in relatively short order
in quite difficult places certainly in
the regions where we're seeing
significant growth at the moment where
pressure on the nhs could happen sooner
rather than later if we can't get on top
of it really quite fast
yes numbers of cases are going up
hospitalizations are going up
icu is going up and unfortunately very
sadly so are deaths
and that means that this is headed in
the wrong direction
there's no cause for complacency here at
all
and sticking to the social distancing
rules i mean this this
virus spreads because of close contact
in certain environments
so we all need to make sure we reduce
the number of contacts we've got
we need to reduce contact in certain
environments particularly indoor
spaces poorly ventilated and we need to
make sure we reduce the probability
of coming into contact with somebody who
is infected by
all of us making sure that if we have
symptoms or with contact we isolate and
keep out of circulation
it's going to be absolutely critical
thanks
uh very much both and thank you robert
beth ruby uh sky news
thank you prime minister at the last
press conference when you announced the
rule of six
your words was always socializing
gatherings of no more than
six inside or out that's the way i think
we can beat the current outbreak
but three weeks later the numbers are
clearly going in the wrong direction
you just said that you are prepared to
introduce
national measures if the evidence
requires it
have you three agreed a threshold at
which you will have to introduce
national measures and to professor witte
uh the covid surveillance survey shows
the virus is overwhelmingly spread
within households
or with people visiting other households
and yet on this measure
different nations have gone in different
directions
is that because different chief medical
officers have offered different
scientific advice or is that down to
different political decision making and
are you
personally mixing with other households
at the moment
right um beth just just on your
your your first question i think the the
best thing i can say is we keep
all of this under constant review and as
you can imagine
uh ministers and officials are really
meeting more or less around the clock
uh the whole time watching uh what's
going on uh the
the the jbc uh department of health uh
phe
we're watching uh around the clock uh
what is happening in all the areas where
uh we we have cause for concern and as i
said uh earlier on
uh we we will keep all measures under
review uh we don't we really don't want
to go back into
the kind of stay-at-home national
lockdown that we saw
uh in uh in march uh and april
uh that's not what we want to do we
think that we can uh we can beat it by
other means we think we can beat it
together by the means that we've
uh we've described but we've we've got
to we've got to watch what's happening
and we will
uh on the question specifically to me uh
the the reality is that in different
countries
we're all uh broadly using the same
groups of things that we're doing i
think
people always highlight the differences
in fact the similarities between
people's responses are are considerably
more striking than that
but there are inevitably variations and
a lot of them have to do with what uh is
the local
uh traditions about how things are
actually operated how people socialize
in different spaces which do vary
they genuinely vary between different
countries and then some of it will be to
do with what seems to work
in a local environment we're all however
trying to pick our very
difficult way between doing not enough
and therefore not getting on top of this
virus and doing too much
where we do get on top of the virus but
do unnecessary harm
socially and economically and it is you
know the economic impact of that
on health in the long run would be
substantial so trying to find a way
through
and it is slightly different in
different countries and in some cases
a bit more than slightly different but i
think the the differences are always
highlighted and the similarities i think
are actually much more striking
in terms of do i follow the guidance and
the rules
i try absolutely to follow whatever the
local guidance is locally
and i also you know i have changed my
behavior as i suspect
everybody watching this has changed
their behavior since
this epidemic began and if the rules
tighten up i will try and follow the new
rules that is completely what we all
should be doing because that is the only
way we collectively
are going to get on top of this thanks
very much chris and thank you beth can
we go to pippa crew of the daily mirror
hello um given everything that we've
seen and heard over the last couple of
weeks i rather i wonder whether
professor witty and sir patrick
you have any concerns that the
government may not be going
far enough fast enough to get the r8
under control
and prime minister if you look in shops
and on public transport it's quite
clear that there's still loads of people
that are not wearing masks or following
the guidance
what would your message be to them
well just first peppa let me let me just
say what i've said
to everybody uh please uh follow the
guidance
and bear in mind that uh you're doing it
not just
uh to protect your uh your neighbor but
ultimately
uh someone that you transmit the disease
to could end up infecting someone
uh that you love it is absolutely
crucial that we stop the spread of this
disease wear a mask on transport in the
way that is
uh recommended and bear in mind that the
fines
are now uh you know very considerable
and they will be imposed
um well in in terms of uh your first
question
uh it's very clear that rates are still
going up and so
we don't have this under control at the
moment and uh the increases that chris
has described in some areas
are of of concern and as i've said will
lead
to further problems so it's incredibly
important
that the um adherence to the the
principles of trying to reduce contact
in the way that i've described
are critical to get this under control
and
the decisions that need to be made are
clearly very difficult
none of them are risk-free they all come
with some
cost and that's human cost in some form
or another
science can provide advice on the
situation
ministers need to make decisions as to
when and how to act
thanks very much patrick and uh thank
you pippa can we go to chris smith of
the times
thank you um can i firstly just pick up
on one of the things
uh patrick said about the need to
isolate if you've got symptoms but
a survey by the government and its
scientific advisors recently showed that
under 20
of people are when they have symptoms or
contacted by test and trace so why do we
think that
is and does it not fundamentally
undermine whatever national
or regional restrictions are in place
and on the point
about the localized nature of the
outbreaks
so far i mean are you saying that the
government's strategy is to come down
hard
over the winter or the north of england
in order to spare london southern
elsewhere
tougher restrictions well can i just
just uh have a go at the the second
point
uh that that chris uh what we want to do
is
is just to stamp out the or bear down on
the virus in such a way as to
get the r down uh below one uh where we
need to
to do that most and that's clearly uh in
the in the areas that we've
identified that's why the the the extra
restrictions that are coming on
uh in those areas and the faster we can
we can get it done the better it's all
about uh compliance all about getting on
if you have
any doubt at all about what to do in
those uh in those areas get on the
website
and and check out what the what the
restrictions are but
working together i've absolutely no
doubt that we can do it
um maybe i'll have a first one i think
chris can come back in
i mean i think just as a general comment
it would be wrong to take from this that
this is a
problem that's only in certain areas it
is worse in certain areas but there is
evidence of spread
everywhere and we need to be mindful of
that and everyone needs to take
precautions across the country your
comment about isolation
it's very very important that isolation
does occur
the point of testing is not to get a
result
on its own it's to make sure that you
take action and isolation is clearly
part of that it's important for symptoms
and it's important for contacts
and if we don't isolate we will end up
with more people circulating
than um well you don't want anyone
circulating ideally but you'll end up
with people
circulating and giving the virus to
others so the isolation isolation's
important and you're right
the study that came out in in a few
weeks ago
suggested low levels of self-declared
intent to
isolate and and that was from a few
months ago
i think the figures more recently may
suggest a slightly more positive picture
but it's for all of us to do
i mean it's something that you can't
literally
enforce upon people it's something that
we need to do and take accountability
for because by not isolating
we're increasing the chance that others
will catch it and of course
it will spread amongst the age groups
and cause the problems we've described
chris
sorry well i think the only thing to add
is that i think there is
when you look at polling or other data
the great majority people are very
supportive of this and the great
majority people wish to do it
and the you know the support for this is
strong because people wish to get on top
of this because they realize
this is the way they can protect their
neighbors their families
uh and the nhs and that that is really
clear i think and has been
remarkably consistent and is a strong
tribute as always to the remarkable
altruism of the british people
so just listening to this i i realize
there is a slight danger of
of us of people getting the wrong
message from
uh from this in the sense that you know
yes of course
and you're right to pick this up chris
yes of course uh it is more acute in
these
uh in these particular local areas but
it is vital to stress that this remains
a
a national threat and a national
challenge and we all have to
uh to fight it together we can't just uh
expect it to be solved uh you know
in the parts of the country which we uh
you know i think are particularly
affected it's it's down to down to all
of us
um uh jonathan walker uh newcastle
journal and chronicle hello prime
minister um
under the restrictions in place in the
northeast a person
can't legally visit their parents in the
back garden but they can legally sit
with five mates in a pub beer garden
um although they're advised not to and
can you explain the logic behind these
rules and
what help is available to businesses who
are struggling to understand and enforce
these rules um in the northeast
and also if i may in addition can i ask
you
have you considered that just as complex
national rules had to be replaced by
something simpler the rule of six
there may be a case for doing something
similar with local lockdowns
yeah well i i i i obviously the what
we're trying to do here is
uh to to fight it nationally with a
package of of
of measures that i think everybody is
from familiar with
uh hands-face based the rule of six the
the reduction in
uh in hospitality hours and so forth
locally
uh in the northeast what we're also
doing is
uh restricting uh contact uh you can
you can't you may meet in your with your
own household group but
inside whether at home or in hospitality
settings and
that's the rule and you can't socially
encourage not to socialize
outside of course uh and people will
pick up on
uh you know various discrepancies or
complications complexities that have
arisen as a result of this
of this local approach the best thing i
can tell you uh jonathan is
everybody uh in the northeast or
elsewhere in merseyside
midlands everywhere where there are
there are local restrictions get on the
the websites look at precisely what uh
you you need to do
but you know so much of this is about
common sense and about following
uh the basics of the of the guidance and
just restricting the possibility of
transmission
uh from yourself to somebody else or or
from somebody else
to you and i think people do
instinctively now understand how to do
that
the more we do that the more efficiently
we do that the better the chance
we all have of getting this virus done
thank you very much uh jonathan thank
you everybody
and see you next time thank you
[Music]
see the headlines as they happen and
watch bbc news live in the app and get
the full story with bbc dot co dot uk
forward slash news follow the story for
all the latest with bbc news